# MasterThesis
Intorduction to Mixed Hodge Structures, overview of Calabi-Yau Mirror Symmetry and a construction of a Mirror dual for a non-CY variety.

The main goal of this thesis is to study mixed Hodge theory and apply its tools to an extension of classical Mirror Symmetry, originally formulated for pairs of Calabi-Yau manifolds, to a broader class of varieties. In particular, we study a construction of a mirror dual for a genus 2 curve and we calculate the Hodge numbers of the mirror using the monodromy weight spectral sequence associated to the cohomological mixed Hodge complex structure on the sheaf of vanishing cycles.

The employment of mixed Hodge structures is necessary since the varieties in the construction of non-Calabi Yau mirror symmetry are in general not smooth.
For this reason we spend a great deal of time studying mixed Hodge structures extensively.

The structure of the thesis is as follows.
The first two chapters contain a summary of classical Hodge theory, Hodge structures and their variations.
The third chapter introduces the notion of mixed Hodge structure, central for extending features of classical Hodge theory to not necessarily compact Kahler (projective) varieties. The next chapter deals with families of varieties degenerating to a singular variety. Finally, the last two chapters treat two particular constructions in the mathematical side of Mirror Symmetry, a theory which originates from particle physics. 

Hodge theory is a vast area of study in complex algebraic geometry. 
Firstly we illustrate classical results which form the foundation of Hodge theory like Hodge's theorem, the isomorphism between the space of harmonic differential $k$-forms and the $k$-th cohomology group on a compact oriented Riemannian manifold. Then, restricting our attention to Kahler manifolds, one proves the Hodge identities which imply that the $d$, $\partial$ and $\bar \partial$-Laplacians are proportional to each other, which in turn implies that the $d$-Laplacian respects the bidegree. From this, it immediately follows a decomposition of the space of harmonic forms that in the compact Kahler case gives the famous Hodge decomposition and Hodge symmetry theorems:
         $H^k(X,\mathbb{C}) = \bigoplus_{p+q=k} H^{p,q}(X)$     and    $H^{p,q}(X) = \overline{H^{q,p}(X)}$.
This decomposition, among many consequences, gives a topological constraint for compact Kahler manifolds: their odd Betti numbers are even. Hodge numbers are usually displayed inside the Hodge diamond. We work out some examples of such diamonds. The main reference here is Voisin07.


Cup product with the $(1,1)$-Kahler form gives the Lefschetz map which gives a further decomposition, the Lefschetz decomposition.
The structure on the $k$-th cohomology of a compact Kahler manifold $X$ is a Hodge structure of weight $k$. This means we have a lattice $H_{\mathbb{Z}}$, here $H^k(X,\mathbb{Z}) / \textrm{torsion}$, together with a decomposition of its complexification $H_\mathbb{C} = \bigoplus_{p+q=k} H^{p,q}$ satisfying $H^{p,q} = \overline{H^{q,p}}$. To give a Hodge structure of weight $k$ on $H_\mathbb{Z}$ is equivalent to give a decreasing filtration $\{ F^p \}$ on $H_\mathbb{C}$ satisfying $F^p \oplus \overline{F^{k-p+1}} \simeq H_\mathbb{C}$. A filtration with this property is called a Hodge filtration.
There are many ways of constructing new Hodge structures from given ones and moreover they form an abelian category. The introduction of a polarization, together with the Hodge-Riemann bilinear relations allows to study a classification of polarized Hodge structures as points in a moduli space called local period domain.

The second chapter introduces the study of families of compact Kahler manifolds and the concepts of a polarized variation of Hodge structure and of the period map associated to it. The references for this part are FilippiniRuddatThompson15, CarlsonMullerStachPeters03 and Voisin07. The Hodge subspaces of the cohomology of the fibres of a family may vary, nevertheless their dimensions remain fixed. The local period domains have structures of algebraic (flag) varieties. We see some examples. When the base space of the family is not simply connected, we need to quotient the period domain by a monodromy group in order to have a well defined global period map.
This is known as the geometric setting. Abstract variations of Hodge structure is a generalization of this case. The Leray sheaves are substituted by any local system on the base manifold and the Gauss-Manin connection is replaced by a flat connection satisfying Griffiths transversality.

Deligne established the existence of a linear algebraic structure on the cohomology of complex algebraic varieties, called mixed Hodge structure; it reflects geometric and topological properties of algebraic varieties, which means it depends on the geometry and not only the topology of such varieties. This theory is analyzed thoroughly in the third chapter. The main reference here is PS08.
A mixed Hodge structure is the data of $(H_\mathbb{Z},W,F)$ where $H_\mathbb{Z}$ is a free f.g. $\mathbb{Z}$-module, $W$ a finite increasing filtration on the rational vector space $H_\mathbb{Q} = H \otimes \mathbb{Q}$:
${0}\subset\cdots\subset W_0\subset W_1\subset W_2\subset \cdots\subset H_\mathbb{Q}$
called weight filtration and $F$ is a finite decreasing filtration on $H_\mathbb{C} =H \otimes \mathbb{C}$:
$H_{\mathbb{C}} =F^0\supset F^{1}\supset F^2\supset\cdots\supset{0}$
called Hodge filtration, such that the induced filtration by $F$ on the graded piece $Gr^W_k H_\mathbb{C}=W_{k}H_\mathbb{C}/W_{k-1}H_\mathbb{C}$ defines a pure Hodge structure of weight $k$.
Morphisms of MHS preserve by definition both filtrations and can be shown to be strict, which implies that an injection of MHS is still an injection when considered as the induced map on graded pieces. For this reason, mixed Hodge structures respect exact sequences.
The main theorem of Deligne of mixed Hodge theory states that for every complex algebraic variety, the integral cohomology groups carry a natural mixed Hodge structure, functorial with respect to algebraic maps.
We give the construction of the MHS in the case of a not necessarily compact smooth algebraic variety $U$. By Nagata embedding theorem, $U$ is Zariski open in some compact algebraic variety $X$, which by Hironaka, we can choose to be smooth and s.t. $D=X \setminus U$ is a normal crossing divisor (NCD) in $X$. To take into account the properties of the NCD, we need to introduce the logarithmic de Rham complex $\Omega^\bullet_X ( \log D)$ of forms having poles of order at most one along $D$. Deligne showed that this complex is quasi-isomorphic to (the pushforward of) the De Rham complex of $U$, which implies that its hypercohomology is the cohomology of the variety $U$. To construct the MHS then, it suffices to construct two filtrations $W,F$ on the logarithmic De Rham complex, the first one by order of poles and for the second one we take the naive one and verify that they satisfy some properties so that the induced filtrations in hypercohomology induce a mixed Hodge structure on $H^n(U)$. These properties are encoded in the definition of a mixed Hodge complex of sheaves. After seeing some concrete examples of this construction we extrapolate the properties and come to the axioms of mixed Hodge complexes and (cohomological) mixed Hodge complexes of sheaves.
The construction of the \emph{mixed cone} for a morphism of mixed Hodge complexes of sheaves allows us to get induced long exact sequences of MHS's. Moreover one can define mixed Hodge structures on relative cohomology groups. In an example, we calculate the Hodge numbers and the long exact sequence of the pair. Finally, we see another important example of a mixed Hodge structure, namely the one on the cohomology of a singular normal crossing variety, which is defined via a cohomological mixed Hodge complex $B^\bullet$. We carry out calculations in the example of three lines in $\mathbb{P}^2$, i.e. the normal crossing variety $V(xyz) \subset \mathbb{P}^2$, topologically a necklace of three spheres.

In chapter four we investigate what happens near a singular fiber of a degenerating family. In particular we are interested in $1$-parameter semistable degenerations, i.e. proper holomorphic maps $f \colon X \to \Delta$ over the unit disk that are smooth away from a reduced simple normal crossing central fibre $Y = f^{-1}(0)$. The main references here are Schmid73 and PetersSteenbrink08.
Some of the tools needed to study them are connections with logarithmic poles and their residues. The reason being that the cohomology of the smooth fibres over the punctured disk $\Delta^* = \Delta \setminus \{0 \}$ form local systems equipped with a flat connection that acquires a logarithmic singularity and its residue is related to the monodromy automorphism $T$ around the singular fibre. $T$ is quasi-unipotent, i.e. there exists positive integers $l,m \in \mathbb{N}$ s.t. $(T^l - id)^{m}=0$. This is the content of the monodromy theorem proved by Schmid. The logarithm of the unipotent part of the monodromy $N$ is then a nilpotent endomorphism. A linear algebra lemma says that whenever we have a nilpotent endomorphism on a finite dimensional vector space, we have an associated increasing filtration $W(N)$ which is unique satisfying certain properties. In 1973, Schmid used this monodromy weight filtration together with a limiting filtration $F_{\lim}$ to define the so called limiting mixed Hodge structure. In the case of a semistable degeneration, this limiting MHS is induced by a cohomological mixed Hodge complex (CMHC) on the sheaf of nearby cocycles $\psi_f \mathbb{C}_X$ which is a sheaf on the singular fibre. Its (hyper-)cohomology is isomorphic to the cohomology of the nearby smooth fibre.
is dedicated to this CMHC. Its construction starts with a double complex whose total complex $A^\bullet$ we show to be quasi-isomorphic to the relative De Rham complex which is itself quasi-isomorphic to the sheaf of nearby cocycles. The degeneracy at the second page of the monodromy weight spectral sequence and the computation of the differentials in the first page allow us to read Hodge numbers off of the $E_2$-page. We conclude with Steenbrink long exact sequence of MHS induced by a short exact sequence of CMHC's relating $B^\bullet$ and $A^\bullet$:
$0 \rightarrow B^\bullet \xrightarrow{\mathrm{sp}} A^\bullet \rightarrow \bar A^\bullet \rightarrow 0$
where $\bar A^\bullet$ is isomorphic to the sheaf of vanishing cycles $\phi_f \mathbb{C}_X$. We end the chapter showing this theory within an example of a family of elliptic curves degenerating to a singular central fibre.

In the final part of the thesis we study the application of this theory to Mirror Symmetry.
Superstring theory suggests that there are six extra dimensions of spacetime in addition to the four of Einstein. Moreover these six (real) dimension must be shaped like a (complex) three-dimensional Calabi-Yau manifold. Additionally, theoretical physicists discovered a duality for Calabi-Yau $3$-folds which is called Mirror Symmetry. This correspondence, among other things, implies a duality of Hodge numbers between the two mirror partners. 
If two smooth $n$-dimensional Calabi-Yau manifolds $Y$ and $Y^\circ$ are mirror partners, then
$h^{p,q}(Y) = h^{n-p,q}(Y^\circ) \quad \text{ for } \quad  0 \leq p,q \leq n.$
The main references for this part are CoxKatz99 and CoxLittleSchenk11.
In chapter five we review the construction of Batyrev of mirror pairs of CY's, which makes use of toric geometry. From a reflexive polytope $\Delta$, one derives a Fano variety $X_\Delta$. It is the toric projective variety associated to the normal fan $\Sigma_\Delta$ of the polytope. Every reflexive polytope $\Delta$ has a polar dual $\Delta^\circ$ which is also reflexive and this duality lifts to a duality between families of Calabi-Yau hypersurfaces in certain toric varieties closely related to $X_\Delta$ and $X_{\Delta^\circ}$. Letting $Y^\circ$ be the so called Batyrev mirror of $Y$, and $n=\dim Y = \dim Y^\circ$, then 
$h^{1,1}(Y) = h^{n-1,1}(Y^\circ) \quad \text{ and } \quad  h^{n-1,1}(Y) = h^{1,1}(Y^\circ).$
For a threefold, $n=3$, this is all is needed to prove the duality of Hodge diamonds.
The last chapter is dedicated to the construction of GKR17, where a mirror duality is proposed for pairs of Landau-Ginzburg models $(X,w) \leftrightarrow (\check{X}, \check{w})$, i.e. quasi-projective varieties with non-constant regular functions.    
Here, we witness the interplay between mixed Hodge structures and Mirror Symmetry. Indeed, the mirror of a smooth not necessarily Calabi-Yau variety $\check{S}$ is a possibly singular variety $S$ which needs to be furnished with the sheaf of vanishing cycle (shifted by one) $\mathcal{F}_S$. Once we define Hodge numbers for the pair $(S,\mathcal{F}_S)$, the main theorem is 
$h^{p,q}(\check{S})= h^{d-p,q}(S,\mathcal{F}_S),$
where $d=\dim S = \dim \check{S}$.
Here the construction also involves toric geometry but we don't restrict ourselves to reflexive polytopes. The mirror of a genus $2$ curve turns out to be topologically a configuration of three projective lines intersecting in two triple points.

We carry out calculations of Hodge numbers for the mirror of a genus $2$ curve verifying the Mirror theorem.  To do so, we employ the monodromy weight spectral sequence for the sheaf of vanishing cycles we saw before. We see in this example that the Hodge diamond of the mirror dual of a genus $2$ curve is the one of a genus $2$ curve, mirrored along the mirror axis, the $45^\circ$ line through the center of the diamond.
